From 5.x to 6.0
===============

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:
   :depth: 1

Databases
---------

DB Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

 - The minimal MySQL version is now 8.0
 - The minimal MariaDB version is now 10.6

ES Modules
----------

We no longer use RequireJS for inclusion of AMD JavaScript modules. Instead we now rely on the native use of ECMAScript modules.
All modules can be referenced under the same name as an importable module.

Related functions changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* ``elgg_define_js()`` this function has been removed. You might need ``elgg_register_esm()`` as a replacement.
* ``elgg_require_js()`` this function has been removed. You might need ``elgg_import_esm()`` as a replacement.
* ``elgg_unrequire_js()`` this function has been removed

The event 'config', 'amd' has been removed.
The event 'elgg.data', 'site' has been removed. You can switch to the 'elgg.data', 'page' event.

.. note::

	With the switch to ECMAScript modules we can no longer add Sub-Resource Integrity checks to the imported modules.

.. note::

	With the switch to ECMAScript modules we temporarily dropped Javascript testing features. This will be added in the future.

Composer
--------

PHP Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The minimal PHP version is now 8.1. Also the ``intl`` module is now required to be enabled.

PHPUnit
~~~~~~~

Elgg now uses PHPUnit 10.5. You might need to update your tests.

Annotations
-----------

Due to a naming conflict in the default join alias between the ``annotations`` and ``metadata`` table, the default join
alias for the ``annotations`` table has been changed from ``n_table`` to ``a_table``.

If your code uses very specific clauses (select, where, order_by, etc.) you need to update your code. If you use the
``\Elgg\Database\QueryBuilder`` for your query parts you should be ok.

Enabled column
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``enabled`` column for annotations has been removed. An annotation is no longer enabled or disabled. 
You can no longer perform the ``enable`` and ``disable`` API calls on annotations. Other related API functions have been removed.

Entity Icons
------------

Cropping coordinates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The cropping coordinates of the default icon (``icon``) are now stored in a uniform way, same as those of the other icon types.
The metadata ``x1``, ``x2``, ``y1`` and ``y2`` no longer exist. Use the new ``\ElggEntity`` function ``getIconCoordinates()``.

Icontime
~~~~~~~~

The metadata ``icontime`` has been removed from the database. This was an unreliable way to check if an icon was uploaded.
This was only stored for the icon type ``icon``.

A reliable way to check if an icon was uploaded is to use the ``\ElggEntity::hasIcon()`` function.

Headings
--------

The use of headings (h1, h2, h3) have been revisited throughout the entire codebase to make sure they are used when appropriate
and that they also are used in the correct order. You can read more about the intended usage in :doc:`/design/a11y`.

Most notable changes are the following:

* H1 is always the page title (and no longer the logo / site name)
* Modules (info, sidebar, widgets) use the H2 heading
* H3 headings on entity / relationship / annotation summary titles have been replaced by a regular text element 

Changes in functions
--------------------

Removed lib functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* ``elgg_disable_annotations()`` has been removed
* ``elgg_enable_annotations()`` has been removed
* ``elgg_set_view_location()`` has been removed
* ``elgg_unrequire_css()`` has been removed. Use ``elgg_unregister_external_file('css', $view)`` as replacement.

Removed class functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* ``\ElggAnnotation->enable()``
* ``\ElggAnnotation->disable()``
* ``\ElggEntity->disableAnnotations()``
* ``\ElggEntity->enableAnnotations()``
* ``\ElggEntity->getTags()`` use ``elgg_get_metadata()`` as an alternative.

Lib functions function parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* ``elgg_get_simplecache_url()`` has the second argument (``$subview``) removed. The full ``$view`` name needs to be provided as the first argument.

Miscellaneous API changes
-------------------------

* The interface ``\Elgg\EntityIcon`` has been removed. Implemented functions in ``\ElggEntity`` have been moved to ``\Elgg\Traits\Entity\Icons``
* View names from a 'css' or 'js' view folder now always need to be referenced by their full view name (previously is was possible to omit the first folder if it was 'css' or 'js')

Removed Config values
------------------------

* ``system_cache_loaded``
