Internationalization
####################

Make your UI translatable into many different languages.

If you'd like to contribute translations to Elgg, see :doc:`the contributors' guide </about/contributing>`.

The default language is ``en`` for English. Currently Elgg will always fall back to an English translation,
even if the site's language is not English; this is a known bug.

Overview
========

Translations are stored in PHP files in the ``/languages`` directory of your plugin. Each file corresponds to a language. The format is ``/languages/{language-code}.php`` where ``{language-code}`` is the ISO 639-1 short code for the language. For example:

.. code-block:: php

	<?php // mod/example/languages/en.php

	return [
		'example:text' => 'Some example text',
	];

The default language is "en" for English.

To override an existing translation, include it in your plugin's language file, and make sure your plugin is
ordered later on the Admin > Plugins page:

.. code-block:: php

	<?php // mod/better_example/languages/en.php

	return [
		'example:text' => 'Some better text!',
	];

.. note::

    Unless you are overriding core's or another plugin's language strings, it is good practice for the language keys to start with your plugin name. For example: ``yourplugin:success``, ``yourplugin:title``, etc. This helps avoid conflicts with other language keys.

.. warning:: Do not use spaces in your language keys. The JS API does not support them fully.

Optimized client-side loading
-----------------------------

Elgg plans to optimize client-side language loading in the future. Plugins may prepare for this by providing a list of language keys that are likely to be needed (via ``elgg/echo``) on the home page or other common URLs.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php // in mod/example/elgg-plugin.php

    return [
        'home_language_keys' => [
            'example:home:welcome',
            'example:home:intro',
        ],
    ];

Server-side API
===============

``elgg_echo($key, $args, $language)``

Output the translation of the key in the current language.

Example:

.. code:: php

	echo elgg_echo('example:text');

It also supports variable replacement using sprintf syntax:

.. code:: php

	// 'welcome' => 'Welcome to %s, %s!'
	echo elgg_echo('welcome', [
		elgg_get_config('sitename'),
		elgg_get_logged_in_user_entity()->name,
	]);

To force which language should be used for translation, set the third parameter:

.. code:: php

    echo elgg_echo('welcome', [], $user->language);

To first test whether ``elgg_echo()`` can find a translation:

.. code:: php

	$key = 'key:that:might:not:exist';
	if (!elgg_language_key_exists($key)) {
		$key = 'fallback:key';
	}

	echo elgg_echo($key);

.. note:: Some APIs allow creating translations for new keys. Translators should always include an English
          translation as a fallback. This makes ``elgg_language_key_exists($key)`` a reliable way to predict
          whether ``elgg_echo($key)`` will succeed.

Javascript API
==============

This RequireJS plugin ``elgg/echo`` allows loading translations like AMD modules. To translate, register a dependency with the name ``elgg/echo!{key_name}``. The returned module will be a translator function similar to PHP's ``elgg_echo``, but with only the ``args`` argument.:

.. code-block:: javascript

	define(function(require) {
		var intro = require("elgg/echo!example:intro");
		var hello = require("elgg/echo!example:hello");

		alert(intro());
		alert(hello(["World"]));
	});


If you want a specific language, use the module name ``elgg/echo!{key_name}!{lang}``:

.. code-block:: javascript

	define(function(require) {
		var hello = require("elgg/echo!example:hello!es");

		alert(hello(["World"])); // ¡Hola, World!
	});


Like other modules, translators can be loaded on demand:

.. code-block:: javascript

	// in an Ajax success function...

	require(["elgg/echo!example:great"], function(great) {
		alert(great());
	});

Like ``elgg_echo``, translators for non-existent keys will return the key, but you can also directly test whether the key was found:

.. code-block:: javascript

	define(function(require) {
		var lol = require("elgg/echo!nonexistentkey");

		console.log(lol.found); // false
	});

.. warning:: Spaces should not be used in language keys and are not supported fully in this API.


Legacy API
----------

``elgg.echo(key, args, language)`` is like ``elgg_echo`` in PHP, but is deprecated in favor of the ``elgg/echo`` module.

Always require the "elgg" AMD module before working with ``elgg.echo``:

.. code-block:: javascript

	define(function(require) {
		var elgg = require("elgg");

		alert(elgg.echo('intro'));
	});

Translations are also available after the ``init, system`` JavaScript event.
